Understanding different morphological patterns that characterise cities and their part is an essential pursuit of urban morphology. However, the discipline is still looking for quantitative methods of pattern detection, which are both rich in terms of information and scalable (applicable to the large scale of extent, regional and national).

This thesis presents progress towards this goal, which respects the principles of urban morphometrics: the pursuit of a quantitative, systematic and comprehensive analysis of urban form. By linking numerical taxonomy (derived from evolutionary biology) and urban morphology, it proposes a procedure which identifies distinct homogenous patterns of urban development based on the study of urban form. This procedure allows large-scale analysis thanks to a) unsupervised cluster analysis, and b) minimal input-data requirements, i.e. street network and buildings (footprint and height) only and generates an abundant numerical characterisation of urban patterns. From these two sets of entries, the method measures a comprehensive set of 360 unique morphometric descriptors of urban form elements’ spatial relationships, identify homogenous clusters (taxa) representing distinct urban tissues on the ground and determine their phenetic similarity. This combined information constitutes the basis of a taxonomy of urban form, which is organised in the shape of a phenetic tree, a format which other fields, notably evolutionary biology, have used to precisely describe their object of research.

The proposed method is applied to identify and compare two different spatial contexts of historical European cities Prague and Amsterdam, demonstrating its cross-cultural and morphological validity.